=Semantics=

==Division of work==
We used GitHub to organize our work and required a code review for each commit
before it was merged; thus, at least two members of the group understand each
line of code in detail and the entire group understands the overall design. Liz
worked on the building of a well-organized concrete parse tree within ANTLR and
converting the concrete parse tree into the defined abstract syntax tree
format. David defined the structure of the abstract syntax tree and wrote
classes for each node and a visitor class. Maria worked on symbol table design
and population, with collaboration from Shaunak and David.  Liz worked on the
error handling and pretty-printing framework and the testing/verification
framework. Shaunak implemented the semantic checks and fixed many bugs in
underlying layers of the stack. Shaunak and Liz drafted the writeup.  All
members of the team worked on debugging, testing, and polishing the final
product.


==Clarification/addition/assumptions==
Please see the ‘Implementation Issues’ section for a discussion of for loops -
in particular, we do not allow shadowing of the for loop index variable within
the loop block since we treat it as part of the block.  We implemented an
additional check to verify that all variable locations and variable expressions
without indexes correspond to scalar variables. The inverse check is specified
by the spec for verifying that indexed references are to array variables.  **
what if you’re setting a = b where a and b are both arrays?] We assume that
main can either be void or return a value since this was not specified in the
spec one way or another.


==Overview of design, analysis of alternatives, and design decisions==
We split the lexical analysis phase of the project into four parts: creation of
concrete parse tree, conversion of concrete parse tree into abstract syntax
tree, population of the symbol tables, and finally semantic checks using the
AST and the symbol tables. The symbol tables are then used to link individual
method call and variable references to appropriate descriptors.

We created generic visitor classes for walking through the tree and then built
the IR and did semantic checks in multiple passes. On these passes, we built
populated symbol tables, added references to descriptors to each node, and then
enforced semantic checks.

We check for duplicate declarations during symbol table population. All other
semantic checks are handled by a number of specialized visitors. One important
constraint during the semantic checking phase is that the CheckDeclarations
visitor is run before the CheckExprTypes type check. Among other checks, the
first visitor ensures that every array has an index and that no scalar variable
does. During the type checking phase, we are then able to simplify the
INT_ARRAY and BOOLEAN_ARRAY types to INT and BOOLEAN, respectively.

Where possible, we structured the code to be easily testable so that we could
verify that functionality we had written was working correctly without needing
to perform end to end testing. This allowed us to have higher confidence in the
unit tested code and eliminate it as a possible source of bugs when tracking
down issues.


==Implementation issues==
Implementing bug-free tree traversal was more difficult than we initially
expected. Our first attempts did not actually correctly traverse the tree,
leading to bugs in symbol table population and to many nodes with null
descriptors. We attempted to use method overloading to write code that was
minimally repetitive, but this approach did not work since Java resolves method
calls at compile time rather than at runtime. In the end, we addressed these
problems by adding an accept() method to each ASTNode class.

For loops were another area that tripped us up. Because we parsed loop
initialization as an assignment instead of a declaration, we had to create a
special case for ForNodes. We correctly added the for loop’s counter variable
to symbol table of the loop’s body, but we did not attach the counter’s
descriptor to the loop initializer until later.

We incorrectly inserted SyscallArgNodes (used to wrap either an ExpressionNode
or a StringNode) into the list of arguments for non-syscall function calls,
leading to casting errors due to incorrect assumptions about whether
non-syscall function calls needed their arguments wrapped.

At the last minute we caught errors in the way we handled char and string
escaping - we did not realize that the ANTLR AST.getValue() method returned the
entire unaltered token from the lexer, including escaped sequences that needed
to be unescaped and the quotes surrounding the string/char.

Another issue we ran into was how to represent the code in the symbol tables.
After exploring several options, we decided to augment our abstract syntax tree
to contain references to the appropriate descriptors in symbol tables.  These
references were populated during the creation of the symbol tables by a
visitor.  This was particularly useful as it allowed us to traverse the
abstract syntax tree to check for errors, while still using the type
information from the symbol tables.


==Commented source code==
See the README file for an index of what components are located in which
packages, and the individual source files for commented code.


==Known problems==
Please see https://github.com/lizthegrey/6035-compiler/issues for an
up-to-date list of known issues.
